R basics visualize data (#49)
arcus/education_modules: r_basics_visualize_data/r_basics_visualize_data.md

<!--
author:   Joy Payton
email:    paytonk@chop.edu

> version:  0.4

Author: fixed

language: en
narrator: US English Female
title: R Basics: Visualizing Data With ggplot2
comment:  Learn how to visualize data using R's `ggplot2` package.
long_description: Do you want to learn how to make some basic data visualizations (graphs) in R?  In this module you'll learn about the "grammar of graphics" and the base code that you need to get started.  We'll use the basic ingredients of a tidy data frame, a geometric type, and some aesthetic mappings (we'll explain what all of those are).  This module teaches the use of the `ggplot2` package, which is part of the `tidyverse` suite of packages.

> 

Author: fixed

@learning_objectives  

After completion of this module, learners will be able to:

> - Describe what makes a data frame "tidy"

Author: I do think that tidy data is very important in both transform and data viz and it might make sense to pull together all the tidy data info together into another module.  That would also make both the transform and viz more focused and shorter.  Curious to hear your take

> - Describe what makes a data frame "tidy"

Reviewer: oooh, I like that idea. we're also very likely going to need to refer to the concept of tidy data in many other modules, and it's an important concept that doesn't just apply to the world of R (even if it's a term more frequently utilized in the R/tidyverse conversations)  -- it makes sense to pull that out as its own unit of content imo

	var getGif = function() {
		var gif = [];
		$('img').each(function() {
			var data = $(this).data('alt');
			gif.push(data);
		});
		return gif;
	}

	var gif = getGif();

	// Preload all the gif images.
	var image = [];

	$.each(gif, function(index) {
		image[index]     = new Image();
		image[index].src = gif[index];
	});

	// Change the image to .gif when clicked and vice versa.
	$('figure').on('click', function() {

		var $this   = $(this),
				$index  = $this.index(),

				$img    = $this.children('img'),
				$imgSrc = $img.attr('src'),
				$imgAlt = $img.attr('data-alt'),
				$imgExt = $imgAlt.split('.');

		if($imgExt[1] === 'gif') {
			$img.attr('src', $img.data('alt')).attr('data-alt', $imgSrc);
		} else {
			$img.attr('src', $imgAlt).attr('data-alt', $img.data('alt'));
		}

		// Add play class to help with the styling.
		$this.toggleClass('play');

	});

})(jQuery);
</script>
@end

link:  https://chop-dbhi-arcus-education-website-assets.s3.amazonaws.com/css/styles.css
script: https://kit.fontawesome.com/83b2343bd4.js
-->
# R Basics: Visualizing Data With `ggplot2`

<div class = "overview">

## Overview

@comment

**Is this module right for me?** @long_description

> **Estimated time to completion:** 1 hour

Author: fixed

**Pre-requisites**

Minimal experience of using the RStudio IDE and writing R code (specifically, within an R Markdown document) is necessary to understand and use this material.  If you can understand and do the following, you'll be able to complete this course:

* Run a command that's provided to you in the console
* Use the Environment tab to find a data frame and learn more about it

> * Insert a new code chunk in an R Markdown document

Author: Yes, I hadn't written the earlier module though (working backwards *seemed* like a good idea?).  Will add info!

> * Insert a new code chunk in an R Markdown document

Author: For now I'm going to pretend that my intro module is on main, so the link won't work now but will in future...

**Want to watch this process?  Click on the image below to play an animated gif.  It will continue to loop and you can re-start it by clicking again.**

<div style="display:none">@gifPreload</div>

<figure>
  <img src="https://github.com/arcus/education_modules/blob/r_basics_visualize_data/r_basics_visualize_data/media/rstudio_new_project.png?raw=true" height="384" width="512" alt="RStudio can create a new project that gets its contents from a git repository." data-alt="https://github.com/arcus/education_modules/blob/r_basics_visualize_data/r_basics_visualize_data/media/rstudio_new_project.gif?raw=true" style = "border: 1px solid rgb(var(--color-highlight));">

<figcaption style = "font-size: 1em;">Click on the image to play the demo of the above steps!</figcaption>
</figure>

If you already completed this work for a previous module, and it's been a while since you downloaded this project to your computer, you may want to get any new and improved files that have been placed there in the meantime:

* Open your project.
* In the Version Control menu, choose "pull branches".  There are two places to do this, as shown below:

> ![Git button menu with choices to pull and push branches](media/pull_branches.png)<!-- style = "border: 1px solid rgb(var(--color-highlight))" -->  ![Tools menu with choices to pull and push branches](media/pull_branches_2.png)<!-- style = "border: 1px solid rgb(var(--color-highlight))" -->

Author: so good and I will apply to other modules with the same info

![A normally distributed or bell-shaped curve.  The x axis ranges from -3 to 3 while the y axis goes from 0 to 200](media/small_histogram.png)<!-- style = "max-width:800px;"-->

<div class = "question">
In the box below, write what you think the name of this is (all lowercase, please).

[[histogram]]
[[?]] Hint: this word ends in "gram"

<div class = "answer">
<details><summary>Click to see an explanation of the answer.</summary>

"histogram" is the right answer!  A histogram plots the frequency of something in terms of some other thing (for instance, a time value like days).  In our next section, we're going to build a histogram.
</details>
</div>
</div>

### Building Your First Histogram

Please go to your RStudio environment (either the version in the cloud or your local RStudio that you've prepared with a project containing our files for this module).  

If you haven't already: using your RStudio file browser (one of the tabs that usually appears in the lower right), please find and open the `r_basics_visualize_data` folder, and then open the `exercises` folder.  You should then open `visualize.Rmd`, which will allow you to work alongside the sections of this module.

> ![RStudio window showing visualize.Rmd](media/visualize_rmd.png)<!-- style = "max-width: 600px; border: 1px solid rgb(var(--color-highlight))" -->

Author: Yep I will cut.  It *is* redundant

> To get started, let's first load up our fabricated data.  Run the first code chunk by clicking the green "play" button (look at line 10).  This gives you the data frame with fake Covid testing data, the data we will use for our instruction in this module.

Author: better, ty!

For the next step, we'd like for you to go into the **console** to practice running some code there.  The console is usually in the lower left pane (or it might take up the whole left side, if you don't have any files open yet).

In the console, please type in the following.  While you can certainly cut and paste, there is sometimes an advantage to typing the code by hand, because it helps you develop "muscle memory" about how to construct code.  Pay attention to the spelling, capitalization, and parentheses!  

> 

Author: Added "Don't panic if the code we ask you to input seems incomprehensible right now or you get an error message.  We'll walk you through what it all means!"

Also, `ggplot2` graphs look great and the package can be used to generate publication-quality plots.
</div>
<div style = "margin: 1rem auto; max-width: 30%; float:left;">

![ggplot2 logo on a hexagon.  The logo consists of the word "ggplot2" superimposed on light grey graph paper with a line graph connecting blue dots of different shades](media/ggplot2_hex.png)

</div>
</div>

### The ggplot() Function

So here is a quick analysis of how we just used ggplot to make that histogram.

![ggplot code annotated with the steps enumerated in the table below](media/ggplot_analysis.png)<!-- style = "max-width: 600px;" -->

<lia-keep>
<table style = "width = 100%">
<tr><th style = "width: 45%;"></th><th style = "width: 45%;"></th></tr>
<tr style="padding: 3em; border: 1px solid rgb(var(--color-text));"><td>1) We always start with <code>ggplot()</code>.</td>
<td><pre style = "color: rgba(var(--color-text), 0.5); margin:1em; font-size:0.8em;">
<span style = "color: rgb(var(--color-text)); font-weight: bold;">ggplot(</span>data = covid_testing<span style = "color: rgb(var(--color-text)); font-weight: bold;">)</span> +
  geom_histogram(mapping = aes(x = pan_day))
</pre>
</td></tr>

> <tr style="padding: 3em; border: 1px solid rgb(var(--color-text));"><td>2) Give ggplot a <b>data frame</b> to start with, in this case, our <code>covid_testing</code> data frame.</td>

Author: Great catch tysm

<td><pre style = "color: rgba(var(--color-text), 0.5); margin:1em; font-size:0.8em;">
ggplot(<span style = "color: rgb(var(--color-text)); font-weight: bold;">data = covid_testing</span>) +
  geom_histogram(mapping = aes(x = pan_day))
</pre>
</td></tr>
<tr style="padding: 3em; border: 1px solid rgb(var(--color-text));"><td>3) We build our plot across several different lines, so we include a <code>+</code> to say "wait, we're not done yet!"
</td>
<td><pre style = "color: rgba(var(--color-text), 0.5); margin:1em; font-size:0.8em;">
ggplot(data = covid_testing) <span style = "color: rgb(var(--color-text)); font-weight: bold;">+ </span>
  geom_histogram(mapping = aes(x = pan_day))
</pre>
</td></tr>

> <tr style="padding: 3em; border: 1px solid rgb(var(--color-text));"><td>4) In the second line, we describe what kind of geometric representation we want -- a histogram.

Author: agree

</td>
<td><pre style = "color: rgba(var(--color-text), 0.5); margin:1em; font-size:0.8em;">
ggplot(data = covid_testing) +
  geom_histogram(<span style = "color: rgb(var(--color-text)); font-weight: bold;">mapping = aes(</span>x = pan_day<span style = "color: rgb(var(--color-text)); font-weight: bold;">)</span>)
</pre>
</td></tr>
<tr style="padding: 3em; border: 1px solid rgb(var(--color-text));"><td>6) We only have to specify the <b>x axis</b>, because a histogram assumes that you're counting rows of data and will map that to the y axis.
</td>
<td><pre style = "color: rgba(var(--color-text), 0.5); margin:1em; font-size:0.8em;">
ggplot(data = covid_testing) +
  geom_histogram(mapping = aes(<span style = "color: rgb(var(--color-text)); font-weight: bold;">x = pan_day</span>))
</pre>
</td></tr>
</table>
</lia-keep>

### A Template

So that was a lot of information. Let's break this down to build up to a more general template. Here's a preview of that template, and we'll spend the few sections or so exploring it.

> ![ggplot code annotated with the steps enumerated in the list below](media/ggplot_template.png)<!-- style = "max-width:700px;" -->

Reviewer: ```suggestion
![ggplot code follows a general template: the ggplot function with data = some_data_frame in it's parentheses; a plus sign; some geom_function with mapping = aes function inside it's parentheses; and inside the aes function parentheses are some aesthetic mappings. This general template is constant. The data frame, chosen geom_function, and the mappings vary depending on the situation. ](media/ggplot_template.png)<!-- style = "max-width:700px;" -->
```

Author: much better, but *its

You start with the code written in **bold** – **bold** in this template is the constant part - and fill in the details that match what you want. To fill in the details, you need to do 3 things:

> 1) Pick a **tidy data frame** (this contains the data you want to plot)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1) Pick a **tidy data frame** (this contains the data you want to plot, we'll go over what makes a data frame tidy in the next section)
```

Author: yes but also maybe move tidy data out?  I'll correct for now and then look at the overall gestalt

2) Pick a **geom function** (this is the type of plot you want to make), and

3) Write **aesthetic mappings** (and we'll go over what that means)

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the code below, the three elements you'd customize to create a basic plot are: data_frame, geom_function, and mappings.
```
making explicit in text what the non-bolded parts are.

<lia-keep>
<pre>
<b>ggplot(data = </b>data_frame<b>) +</b>
  geom_function(<b>mapping = aes(</b>mappings<b>))</b>
</pre>
</lia-keep>

> In the next section, we'll talk about what it means to call a data frame "tidy".

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

> In the next section, we'll talk about what it means to call a data frame "tidy".

Author: I did a massive rework that I like better.  Stay tuned!

> ### Using our Template, Step 1

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Template Step 1
```

Let's get started. The first detail is a "tidy" data frame which contains the data you want to plot.

<lia-keep>
<pre>
<b>ggplot(data = </b>data_frame<b>) +</b>
  geom_function(<b>mapping = aes(</b>mappings<b>))</b>
</pre>
</lia-keep>

What do we mean by "tidy" data frame?

> A data set can take on a lot of different shapes with different styles of organizing data. But there is one method or shape that is best suited for data analysis, and that approach is called "tidy."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A data set can take on a lot of different shapes with different styles of organizing data. The one method or shape that is best suited for data analysis is known as "tidy".
```

> ![Table with rows and columns.  The data is not visible, although headers are, and include mrn, gender, `test_id`, and result. In each row and column, an arrow spans the entire row or entire column.](media/tidy_data.png)<!-- style = "max-width: 400px;" -->

Reviewer: ```suggestion
![Table with rows and columns.  The data is not visible, although headers are, and include mrn, gender, test_id, and result. In each row and column, an arrow spans the entire row or entire column.](media/tidy_data.png)<!-- style = "max-width: 400px;" -->
```

A data set is tidy if:

* Each variable is in its own column
* Each observation is in its own row, and
* Each value is in its own cell.

The opposite of "tidy" is often called "messy." And often times a lot of the data analysis work is to convert "messy" data into "tidy data." But for now, fortunately for us, the `covid_testing` data set is tidy already.

Here's one simple example of tidy versus messy. If a column is called "name" and includes first names and last names, that's messy.  It can be difficult to extract just the first names or just the last names, since some people have more than one word forming their first name (José María, Mary Jo) and some people have more than one word forming their last name (de la Cruz, Bonham Carter).  A "tidy" approach would be to have one column for first names and one column for last names.

> [Hadley Wickham](https://www.jstatsoft.org/article/view/v059i10) suggests that there are five common problems that occur to make data "messy":

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Hadley Wickham](https://www.jstatsoft.org/article/view/v059i10) (a statistician who is prominent in the R world -- you'll likely become familiar with his name as you continue your R journey) suggests that there are five common problems that occur to make data "messy":
```

Author: yep good call

* Column headers are values, not variable names.
* Multiple variables are stored in one column.
* Variables are stored in both rows and columns.
* Multiple types of observational units are stored in the same table.
* A single observational unit is stored in multiple tables.

To see a "messy" data frame and its "tidy" alternative, see [a brief 2018 article](https://education.arcus.chop.edu/tidyverse/) for a brief read, or, if you want a deeper dive,  there really isn't a better article than [Hadley Wickham's classic work](https://www.jstatsoft.org/article/view/v059i10).

> ### A Quick Check In!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Quiz: Tiny data
```

            <p>13.9</p>
            </td>
            <td style="padding: 0.5em;">
            <p>88</p>
            </td>
            <td style="padding: 0.5em;">
            <p>95</p>
            </td>
            <td style="padding: 0.5em;">
            <p>21.8</p>
            </td>
            <td style="padding: 0.5em;">
            <p>20.6</p>
            </td>
        </tr><tr><td style="padding: 0.5em;">
            <p>Anxiety Alone (n=13m, 15f)</p>
            </td>
            <td style="padding: 0.5em;">
            <p>124</p>
            </td>
            <td style="padding: 0.5em;">
            <p>119</p>
            </td>
            <td style="padding: 0.5em;">
            <p>20.7</p>
            </td>
            <td style="padding: 0.5em;">
            <p>18.3</p>
            </td>
            <td style="padding: 0.5em;">
            <p>100</p>
            </td>
            <td style="padding: 0.5em;">
            <p>110</p>
            </td>
            <td style="padding: 0.5em;">
            <p>24.2</p>
            </td>
            <td style="padding: 0.5em;">
            <p>20.5</p>
            </td>
        </tr></tbody></table>

> <div class = "question">

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
I don't think this is required for liascripts questions and currently is showing up as text in the actual liascript module

Which of the following are ways to make this dataset "tidy"?  Check all that apply!

> 

Reviewer: this entire section is appearing all on one page. 

I was about to try to make some suggestions to hopefully fix it, but I'm realizing it's probably more efficient to have you do that on your end where you can see updates in realtime.

Complicating matters, sometimes you just set the way points or lines look, not by mapping them to data, but by setting them to a predetermined value no matter what.  For instance, if you wanted all the points in a scatter plot to be purple stars, regardless of the data represented, we would call this "setting" an aesthetic, not "mapping" it.  

Picking the best aesthetics for your graph is as much an art as it is a science. Claus Wilke's *Fundamentals of Data Visualization* is a great introduction to this topic.

The distinction between visual elements that are "set" and those that are "mapped", and the code that each of these requires, is a common point of confusion and frustration for new users of ggplot, so if you're not solid on these concepts, give the last couple of sections a quick re-read before moving ahead.

### Exercise Time!

Using your RStudio file browser (one of the tabs that usually appears in the lower right), please find and open the `r_basics_visualize_data` directory, and then open `visualize_exercises.Rmd`, which will allow you to work alongside the sections of this module.

> ![RStudio window showing visualize_exercises.Rmd](media/visualize_exercises.png)<!-- style = "max-width: 600px; border: 1px solid rgb(var(--color-highlight))" -->

Reviewer: image not appearing

To get started, let's first load up our fabricated data.  Run the first code chunk by clicking the green "play" button (look at line 10).  This gives you the data frame with fake Covid testing data, the data we will use for our instruction in this module.  You may have already done this a few sections ago, but it won't hurt to do it again.

Then, work through the exercises in the `visualize_exercises.Rmd` file, adding and updating code as indicated.

Stop when it says "Stop here".  We'll go over the solutions in the next section.

### Solutions

If you like, you can open the solutions version of `visualize_exercises.Rmd` by using your file browser to open `visualize_solutions.Rmd`.

You had three tasks to complete.  We'll go through them one at a time.

In your first task, you were asked to do what we already did once in this module: create a histogram of Covid tests as a function of `pan_day`.  There were three blanks to fill in, and three numbered instructions.

> ![Lines 18-31 of visualize_exercises.Rmd](media/task_1.png)<!-- style = "max-width:700px; border: 1px solid rgb(var(--color-highlight))" -->

Reviewer: image note appearing

Here's the solution that you should place in that code chunk:

``` r
ggplot(data = covid_testing) +
  geom_histogram(mapping = aes(x = pan_day))
```

In the second task, you were asked to rework that code with a bin width ("binwidth" in code) that corresponded to daily counts:

> ![Lines 44-50 of visualize_exercises.Rmd](media/task_2.png)<!-- style = "max-width:700px; border: 1px solid rgb(var(--color-highlight))" -->

Reviewer: not appearing

Here's the solution that you should place in that code chunk:

``` r
ggplot(data = covid_testing) +
  geom_histogram(mapping = aes(x = pan_day), binwidth = 1)
```

Finally, for the third task, you had to create a new code chunk by using copy and paste, **and** you had to add an aesthetic mapping using "fill".  Complicated!

> ![Lines 58-60 of visualize_exercises.Rmd](media/task_3.png)<!-- style = "max-width:700px; border: 1px solid rgb(var(--color-highlight))" -->

Reviewer: same

And here's the solution:

```
ggplot(data = covid_testing) +
  geom_histogram(mapping = aes(x = pan_day, fill = result), binwidth = 1)
```

### Setting vs. Mapping Aesthetics

In the third task you just completed (if you didn't actually do it, at least go back one section and read about the three tasks), you **mapped** the fill aesthetic to the **result** variable, by writing "fill = result" inside the **aes()** function:

<div style = "align-items: center; display: flex;">

<div style = "margin: 1rem; max-width: 45%; float:left;"> ![Histogram of Covid tests as a function of `pan_day`.  The bars forming the histogram have three colors: a small blue section at the bottom, representing positive results, a much larger green section in the middle for negative results, and a tiny red section at the top for invalid test results.](media/multicolor_histogram.png)
</div>
<div style = "margin: 1rem auto; max-width: 45%; float:left;">

<pre>

> ggplot(data = covid_testing) +

Reviewer: probably needs to be wrapped -- currently extends straight off the screen requiring scrolling to view entire line

Author: stupid liascript rendering ugh.  Fixing.

## Working With Geoms

Consider: how are these two plots similar?  How are they different?

<div style = "align-items: center; display: flex;">

<div style = "margin: 1rem; max-width: 45%; float:left;"> ![histogram of covid data](media/mini_histogram.png)
</div>
<div style = "margin: 1rem auto; max-width: 45%; float:left;"> ![frequency polygon of covid data](media/mini_freqpoly.png)
</div>
</div>

These two graphs share the same data, plotted on the same x and y axes.  What's different? What's different is that on the left, the data is shown as a histogram, and on the right, it's shown as what's called a frequency polygon.

A geom function is a function that, given the data and aesthetic mappings, generates the **geometric object** used to represent the data.

In the next exercise, you're going to work hands-on with geom functions.

### Exercise Time!

In your RStudio environment, you should already have `visualize_exercises.Rmd` open.  If not, please reopen it.  Scroll down to `### Your Turn: Geom functions`, which should be around line 90 or so.

> ![Lines 91-106 of visualize_exercises.Rmd](media/ex_2_task_1.png)<!-- style = "max-width:700px; border: 1px solid rgb(var(--color-highlight))" -->

Reviewer: image not appearing

Author: fun fact, you gotta enclose text containing underscores in back ticks in alt text!  the more you knoooooow

Then, work through the exercises from that point forward, running, adding, and updating code as indicated.  Hint: take advantage of code completion suggestions in RStudio to help you make an educated guess as to how to proceed, especially in the first task.

We'll go over the solutions in the next section, and you can also look in the RStudio file browser and open `visualize_solutions.Rmd` to see the solution!

### Solutions

If you like, you can open the solutions version of `visualize_exercises.Rmd` by using your file browser to open `visualize_solutions.Rmd`.

You had three tasks to complete.  We'll go through them one at a time.

Your first task invited you to run a code chunk that creates a histogram and use that code as the basis of a new code chunk that creates a frequency polygon.  

> ![Lines 91-106 of visualize_exercises.Rmd](media/ex_2_task_1.png)<!-- style = "max-width:700px; border: 1px solid rgb(var(--color-highlight))" -->

Reviewer: same

This is the solution code:

```
ggplot(data = covid_testing) +
  geom_freqpoly(mapping = aes(x = pan_day))
```

In your second task, you were asked to set the color of the line to "blue".  Note that lines have "color" and shapes have "fill" (for the inside) as well as optional "color" (for the edges).

> ![Lines 110-115 of visualize_exercises.Rmd](media/ex_2_task_2.png)<!-- style = "max-width:700px; border: 1px solid rgb(var(--color-highlight))" -->

Reviewer: same

This is the proper code:

```
ggplot(data = covid_testing) +
  geom_freqpoly(mapping = aes(x = pan_day), color = "blue")
```

Finally, you were asked to predict what the output of `ggplot` code using two different `geom_` functions would be:

> ![Lines 122-131 of visualize_exercises.Rmd](media/ex_2_task_3.png)<!-- style = "max-width:700px; border: 1px solid rgb(var(--color-highlight))" -->

Reviewer: same

| ![Crossed X and Y axes](media/positions.png)<!-- style = "max-width:75px;" -->  ![Display of color choices](media/colors.png)<!-- style = "max-width:75px;" -->  | 3. **Aesthetic mappings**, which tell R how to represent data as graphical markings on the plot. |
| ![Histogram of Covid tests as a function of `pan_day`.  The bars forming the histogram have three colors: a small blue section at the bottom, representing positive results, a much larger green section in the middle for negative results, and a tiny red section at the top for invalid test results.](media/multicolor_histogram.png)<!-- style = "max-width:75px;" -->   ![Histogram of Covid tests as a function of `pan_day`.  The bars forming the histogram have three colors: a small blue section at the bottom, representing positive results, a much larger green section in the middle for negative results, and a tiny red section at the top for invalid test results.](media/blue_histogram.png)<!-- style = "max-width:75px;" -->   | Aesthetics can be **mapped** to a variable or **set** to a constant value. |

> ## Additional Resources

Reviewer: Most of what is in this section should probably not be contained in additional resources, which we're generally applying as a place with links to other materials of ours and materials of other groups/sources. 

this section shouldn't contain any new knowledge/information. 

This may be suited better for a "what else" section prior to addtional resources, which would include stuff like the cheat sheet, and additional reading.

Author: Great clarification, agree
